The unit testing.
Overview.
First, a bit of context.
As your projects grow with more scripts, more methods, more complexity, it can be difficult to ensure
that new code doesn't break any old code.
Automated testing can help ensure that your code is functioning as you expect.
Automated testing helps us by finding out how and where bugs occur earlier in the process.
Instead of the much more expensive option of waiting for your end users to report these bugs.
So you can use MVC architectures without testing, and you can use testing without.
MVC architecture.
So why is it important to talk about these topics together?
It's because the combination of these two technologies is incredibly powerful.
By using an architecture like MVC, it helps ensure that your code is more decoupled, that each class
has a single purpose and that solutions are simpler.
All of these are traits for more testable code as well.
Adding testing to your project will add robustness, more confidence, and it encourages simple solutions,
especially when enabled with test driven development, which we'll discuss.
Adding unit testing to your project and workflow will save time.
It saves planning, development and maintenance.
It adds more confidence to your code, and with that confidence, you can have much more boldness in
your Refactors.
Think about running all of your tests before a major refactor, and then after saving you time and giving
you more confidence that the refactor worked well.
Testing is both an art and a science.
With more research and more practice, each developer can develop their own art.
Also, low level testing that's testing things at the unit level.
Individual methods, let's say, and the practices and evolution of your software that will come from
that encourages higher level discussion as well about the architectural choices, dependencies, or
lack thereof throughout your code and how coupled or decoupled these systems are.
This is all part of a larger conversation which invites bringing good organization to your software.
Our first goal, especially new to testing, is to make sure that a specific method has the desired
results.
Once that's done, you can now test it with unexpected conditions and corner cases that may invite discussion
and analysis over the structure of the class itself.
Then you can look at the purpose of the system that that class sits in.
And as I mentioned, this type of analysis gives us an opportunity and a format to look at the large
scale solution we have before us.
In software, there's many different types of testing, and whether you know it or not, you're already
doing testing.
A few of the most common types of tests are a smoke test.
This is a rather casual test of does it work?
For me?
And for many of us, this may be the only type of project testing we're doing.
Every time you do some new code, you run the app like a user, or play the game like a player and you
see does that particular path through the app or the game work the way I expect it to?
Then there's user testing, where periodically, perhaps after a weekly build, you invite some users
or players to give the game a try.
Here you're looking for not just does it have any bugs, but does it meet the user's expectations?
Is it fun to play?
Things like that.
And with a unit test, you're looking at a very small section of the experience, perhaps just a single
method call or a small series of calls as systems work together and you're asking, does it work as
it's intended to work?
As I mentioned, we're already doing smoke testing as a fundamental way to approach projects.
So let's imagine a simple example here.
If we had a click the button app which has a button, and when you click it, you win.
We could add some code to that.
Compile and run the experience.
Click the one button and see if it shows the victory text of you win.
That would be a smoke test, and you could pass that on to the user and see if it works for them.
In both cases, this is a rather expensive test to perform, and it's a very narrow usage of the code
here.
In this simple example, it may seem like we can capture all the use cases, but imagine a larger game
with core loops and meta loops.
You can't count on the developer or the user and the user testing.
Testing all the buttons, all the functionality, all the input, and all the potential outcomes.
When done properly, unit testing can capture more pathways through the code more quickly, and you
can run that suite of tests automatically more frequently.
Over time, you're building a list of permanent tests that sit ready to be run, so you know that new
code doesn't break any old functionality.
Some teams operate under agile development principles, which includes a chunk of your calendar called
a sprint.
For example, every two weeks, the team commits to adding some new features each hour, day, week,
or sprint.
The team can run those automated tests again, it's a great opportunity to catch any bugs.
So how are we running these tests exactly?
Well, unity has testing support within the unity editor.
There's a dedicated window you can open up and manually execute those tests any time you like.
That's a great place to start.
Of course, automating this is possible too, and recommended for larger projects.
There's ways to tie this in with your version control, so that every time you commit or commit to a
certain branch, it can run those tests again.
Unity itself offers some services, including Unity Cloud build.
This mimics running those tests and building your game, but done on a server automatically doing it
once a day or at whatever frequency makes sense.
Now in general unity development, we're familiar with two different modes being inside the unity experience.
Before we hit the play button, we're in edit mode.
Once we hit play.
Until that scene stops, we're in play mode.
With unity testing, you're able to test in either of those two modes.
Then there's several different ways to approach that.
Some of the testing ideas that you'd have here would be to call a method and see if it gives you the
expected result.
Let's say we have a math system class with an add method, and you just pass in known parameters and
see if it matches the known result.
You can also have tests that ask specific questions about editor functionality.
Did the editor window pop up at the proper sizing or our game objects, or the camera in the proper
position before the scene begins?
Doing testing in edit mode when you can is a great place to start, so do that by default.
Play mode testing is incredibly useful, but it comes with the added complexity of runtime code.
Here.
You're testing not just as a certain method return a result, but you're testing that within the larger
lifecycle of game objects and other unity concepts.
And if it here is you can test code that relies on awake, start, update, etcetera, things that only
execute at runtime.
Some testing ideas here are to see if a prefab, once instantiated, executes its start method properly
without any exceptions.
You can test code over time.
Does this loop execute properly after a few seconds?
You can check runtime physics interactions.
How many bounces will a ball have in your 3D game before it stops testing the bounciness factor?
A little bit more context here.
So historically, unity did not offer testing built into the editor using the test runner window.
We'll see.
In the many years since unity first launched, this functionality was slowly added in and expanded as
of the latest version of unity.
We have everything we need to execute the types of tests we want in the ways we want them.
There's never been a better time to add unit testing into your workflow, and together we'll see how
to do that.
Thanks.